Action 53 manual
This is a draft of the common manual for Action 53 multicarts. Its precautions and regional notes sections can be reused for other projects distributed on cartridge.

Contents
1	Precautions
2	Regional notes
3	The menu
4	Connecting a mouse
5	Credits
Precautions
A Game Pak is a high-precision piece of electronics. Don't drop it, and don't take it apart. Don't touch the connector with your fingers or otherwise let it get wet or dirty. Always turn off the Control Deck's power before inserting or removing a Game Pak.*

To fix a blank or scrambled screen, turn the power off and remove and reinsert the Game Pak. If that doesn't work, don't blow on the connector. Instead, scrub the connector with a cotton swab soaked in isopropyl rubbing alcohol and then dry it with the other end.

A small fraction of the population is sensitive to flashing lights and other things seen in video games. If you have had seizures, ask a health care professional before playing video games. To reduce the risk, play with the lights on and don't sit too close to the screen.

Playing too long can hurt your eyes and hands. Make sure to take a few minutes' break every hour. If you feel sick or sore, take a nap.

Leaving a still image on the screen too long may cause it to be permanently burned into the screen. This can happen with games' score indicators or with a game left on pause too long. It can even happen with channel logos or ball game scores on regular TV. Cathode ray tube (CRT) front and rear projection TVs and OLEDs appear to be most affected, with plasma TVs and direct view CRT TVs less so. LCDs and LCD projectors don't appear to suffer from noticeable burn-in. So if leaving a game on pause more than a couple minutes, turn the TV off.

* With the exception of TapeDump.

Regional notes
The NES Control Deck contains a checking integrated circuit (CIC) to ensure good connection with the Game Pak. When the CIC fails to make a connection to the key chip in the Game Pak, the power light blinks slowly. To give each distributor exclusive access to its territory, Nintendo used a slightly different CIC for each region.

Action 53 uses a multi-region key that can interact with the CICs used in North America (NTSC) and both European markets (PAL). If the power light blinks, wait ten seconds and press the Reset button on the Control Deck to change the region. After a successful connection, it saves the region for next time. But if it continues to blink after several tries, or if it comes up with a blank or scrambled screen, the edge connector may be dirty. Clean the Game Pak's edge connector, and try other Game Paks.

All activities work on Family Computer and North American versions of the NES, which use 60 Hz field rate. Some activities will not work on PAL systems, which use 50 Hz field rate.

The menu
Each volume of Action 53 contains well over a dozen games and other activities. After the title screen (press A or wait), a list of activities appears.

With an NES controller in port 1:

Up and Down: Go to the previous or next activity
Left and Right: Go to the previous or next page
A: Open an activity's description, or start the activity if the description is showing
B: Return to the activity list
With a Super NES Mouse in port 1:

Up and Down: Go to the previous or next activity
Left and Right: Go to the previous or next page
Left button: Open an activity's description, or start the activity if the description is showing
Right button: Return to the activity list
With a Zapper in port 2:

Aim up and down: Move the cursor to an activity on this page
Fire above list: Go to the next page
Fire at list: Open an activity's description, or start the activity if the description is showing
Fire offscreen: Return to the activity list
Activities that use the Zapper work only with a standard-definition television (SDTV) using a cathode ray tube (CRT). They do not work with flat-panel, projection, or high-definition TVs.

In most activities, you can press the Reset button to return to the menu. In others, Reset goes back to the activity's title screen, and you can choose to return to the menu from the title screen.

Connecting a mouse
If you can solder, and you have a couple controller extension cables, you can build an adapter to use a Super NES controller or Super NES Mouse with your NES. Almost all activities work with the Super NES controller, which you may find more comfortable to hold than the original NES controller. In activities without specific support for the Super NES controller, the B and Y buttons act as A and B on an NES controller. Some activities in this collection work with a mouse as well.

Pins in the Super NES controller are numbered from the square end to the round end.

1 [oooo|ooo) 7
1:+5V  2:Clk  3:Out  4:D0  5,6:NC  7:Gnd
Connect the five pins to the NES plug end as follows:

       .-
GND -- |7\
CLK <- |21\ -- +5V
OUT <- |3o| -- NC
 D0 -> |4o| -- NC
       '--'
Leave the other two pins on each side disconnected.

Credits
Menu program by Damian Yerrick (PinEight.com | @PinoBatch on Twitter)
Activities developed by contributors listed on activities' description pages
Contains entries from game development competitions hosted by NESdev.com and NintendoAge.com
Game Pak distribution through InfiniteNESLives.com
This product is in no way endorsed by Nintendo.
Navigation menuPage actions
PageDiscussionView sourceHistory
Personal tools
Create accountLog in
Navigation
Wiki main page
NES reference guide
Programming guide
Projects
Offline wiki snapshot
NESdev Forums
NESdev Discord
Recent changes
Search
Search NESdev Wiki
 
Tools
What links here
Related changes
Printable version
Permanent link
Page information
Special Pages
Powered by MediaWiki
This page was last edited on 15 September 2023, at 00:02. Privacy policyAbout NESdev WikiDisclaimers